588

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

Gas Source Localization in Unknown Indoor
Environments Using Dual-Mode
Information-Theoretic Search
Seunghwan Kim , Student Member, IEEE, Jaemin Seo, Student Member, IEEE,
Hongro Jang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Changseung Kim, Graduate Student Member, IEEE,
Murim Kim , Senior Member, IEEE, Juhyun Pyo, and Hyondong Oh , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This letter proposes a dual-mode planner for localizing gas sources using a mobile sensor in unknown indoor spaces.
The complexity of indoor environments creates constraints on
search paths, leading to situations where no valid paths can be
generated, which are termed as dead end in this letter. The proposed
dual-mode planner is designed to effectively address the dead
end problem while maintaining efficient search paths. In addition,
the absence of analytical dispersion models that can be used in
unknown indoor environments presents another critical issue for
indoor gas source localization (GSL). To address this, we present
an indoor Gaussian dispersion model (IGDM) that can analytically
model indoor gas dispersion without a complete map. Finally, we
establish a GSL framework for indoor environments along with
real-time mapping, utilizing the dual-mode planner and IGDM.
This framework is validated in indoor scenarios with the realistic
gas dispersion simulator. The simulation results show the high
success rate of the proposed method, its ability to reduce search
time, and its computational efficiency. Furthermore, through realworld experiments, we demonstrate the potential of the proposed
approach as a practical solution, evidenced by its satisfactory
performance.
Index Terms—Environment monitoring and management, gas
source localization, planning under uncertainty, robotics in
hazardous fields.

I. INTRODUCTION

O

VER the past few decades, numerous hazardous gas leaks
have been reported, highlighting the need for immediate

Received 19 May 2024; accepted 21 November 2024. Date of publication
4 December 2024; date of current version 11 December 2024. This article
was recommended for publication by Associate Editor P.-C. Lin and Editor H.
Moon upon evaluation of the reviewers’ comments. This work was supported
by the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE, Korea) through the
Technology Innovation Program under Grant 20018110, “Development of a
wireless teleoperable relief robot for detecting searching and responding in
narrow space”. (Corresponding author: Hyondong Oh.)
Seunghwan Kim, Jaemin Seo, Hongro Jang, Changseung Kim, and Hyondong Oh are with the Department of Mechanical Engineering, Ulsan National
Institute of Science and Technology (UNIST), Ulsan 44919, South Korea
(e-mail: kevin6960@unist.ac.kr; qkek1019@unist.ac.kr; hlomk@unist.ac.kr;
pon02124@unist.ac.kr; h.oh@unist.ac.kr).
Murim Kim and Juhyun Pyo are with the Human-Centered Robotics Research
and Development Division, Korea Institute of Robot Convergence (KIRO),
Pohang 37553, South Korea (e-mail: mulimkim@kiro.re.kr; jhpyo@kiro.re.kr).
This letter has supplementary downloadable material available at
https://doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2024.3511375, provided by the authors.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LRA.2024.3511375

response mechanisms to minimize their impact. Consequently,
gas source localization (GSL) has emerged as a critical method
for quickly identifying and addressing the sources of gas leaks,
thereby reducing harm and enhancing public safety. However,
since the hazardous gases are often invisible and dangerous for
humans to detect directly, the studies of autonomous GSL with
mobile sensors have been pursued [1], [2]. These autonomous
GSL approaches show significant advantages, including extended detection range, flexible investigation, exploration capabilities, and cost efficiency.
One of the most promising solutions for GSL using mobile
sensors is the information-theoretic source search, which can be
adapted to turbulent environments [2]. Unlike general object
search problems, GSL uses a gas dispersion model that can
explain the relationship between the measured gas concentrations and the source location. However, accurately estimating the
source location and enabling the mobile sensor to make efficient
decisions is challenging due to sensor noise and environmental
uncertainties. Therefore, a combination of Bayesian inference
for gas source location estimation and information theory-based
search strategies has been proposed, with a notable example
being Infotaxis [3]. These information-theoretic source searches
have been validated in various settings, proving their efficiency
in turbulent outdoor environments [4], [5], [6], [7], [8].
However, unlike outdoor environments, since the application
of GSL in indoor settings presents more challenges, it has only
recently begun to attract research attention. In the indoor environments, gas dispersion becomes more complicated due to the
presence of complex obstacles, which significantly affects the
behavior of the gas dispersion compared to open outdoor spaces.
This increased complexity makes it difficult to apply dispersion
models traditionally used in outdoor GSL. Thus, one of the
key challenges in indoor GSL is the development of analytical
dispersion models that can effectively model gas dispersion
considering indoor obstacles to be used for source parameter
estimation. Approaches have been developed to approximate the
likelihood function between gas measurements and gas source
locations using a kernel density estimator based on a large
amount of data [9], [10]. However, this methodology necessitates extensive preliminary work, including numerous iterations
of simulations before it can be implemented. Other studies have
employed the filament dispersion model to address the above
issue [11], [12]. The filament dispersion model leverages indoor
airflow estimated by computational fluid dynamics (CFD) or
Gaussian Markov random fields (GMRF) [13] to simulate gas

2377-3766 © 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies.
Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Bogazici Universitesi. Downloaded on October 03,2025 at 08:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: GAS SOURCE LOCALIZATION IN UNKNOWN INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS USING DUAL-MODE INFORMATION-THEORETIC SEARCH

dispersion. Importantly, the filament dispersion model reduces
time and resources by eliminating the need for pre-simulation
while still effectively predicting gas dispersion. Further research
has utilized neural networks to model indoor gas dispersion
for GSL. In [14], CNN-based methods have been employed to
predict indoor gas dispersion, accounting for indoor obstacles,
flow boundary conditions, and gas source locations. However,
both the filament dispersion model and neural network-based
methods are constrained by the requirement of a complete
map of the indoor environment before implementing GSL. The
additional indoor mapping task to obtain the complete indoor
map could delay the GSL process, highlighting a significant
challenge in the domain of GSL research in fully unknown
indoor environments.
Another significant challenge in indoor GSL is efficiently
generating paths that are suited for complex indoor structures. To
this end, rapidly-exploring random trees (RRT)-based methods
have been widely utilized for generating paths that can avoid
obstacles [7], [15]. However, for real-time operation, the expansion space of the RRT tree needs to be limited; this often
results in tree branches failing to extend beyond a constrained
space, leading to what are termed as dead ends. This limitation
hinders the ability of RRT-based methods to effectively search
for sources in complex indoor spaces.
In this letter, we first propose an indoor Gaussian dispersion
model (IGDM) to effectively model indoor gas dispersion, based
on the assumption that there is no airflow in indoor environments.
Most of the indoor environments are insulated from external
airflow due to the surrounding external walls. Especially if we
assume that there is no use of the air conditioning system, the
airflow in an indoor environment could be considered negligible.
The IGDM disregards airflow, enabling gas dispersion modeling
even with the incomplete indoor map. We show that the IGDM
can be a practical solution for GSL in unknown indoor environments, by demonstrating it within a GSL framework that operates alongside real-time (i.e., online) mapping. Furthermore, we
employ a dual-mode planner to efficiently search the source in
complex indoor environments. The proposed dual-mode planner generates search paths based on information theory with
Bayesian inference, which consists of a local planner and a
global planner. The local planner performs fine-grained search
locally, generating collision-free and informative paths based on
the RRT. The global planner, based on frontier exploration [16],
guides the mobile sensor from dead ends to new information-rich
search areas. The proposed planner has a similar structure to
exploration algorithms, but the key difference is that both the
local planner and the global planner make decisions based on
mutual information about the source location. Additionally, we
introduce a specialized dead end detection method for GSL
to facilitate transitions between the local and global planners
within the dual-mode planning framework. Lastly, to validate
the effectiveness of the proposed approach, numerical simulations are conducted using the realistic gas dispersion simulator, GADEN [17]. Further validation is achieved through
real-world experiments in an indoor environment with actual
CO2 gas leakage scenarios. The sample result of the real-world
experiments are depicted in Fig. 1. To our best knowledge, this
is the first autonomous GSL experimental results in complex
indoor environments including dead ends (e.g., rooms). The
main contributions of this study are listed below:
1) A new gas dispersion model is developed, which is simple
but effective for unknown indoor environments;

589

Fig. 1. Sample result of autonomous GSL experiments. The proposed GSL
framework operates with online mapping in unknown environments and generates search paths suitable for complex indoor environments using the proposed
dual-mode planner.

2) A dual-mode information-theoretic planner is introduced
to generate efficient search paths in complex indoor environments and solve dead end issues effectively; and
3) The practical applicability and reliability of the proposed
approach is demonstrated through real-world experiments.
II. GAS DISPERSION AND SENSOR MODELING
To estimate the location of a gas source using gas sensor
measurements, it is necessary to have a gas dispersion model that
can represent the relationship between gas concentration and the
source location, as well as a sensor model that can represent the
relationship between gas sensor measurements and the actual gas
concentration. The isotropic plume model [3] and the Gaussian
dispersion model [6], both designed to analytically describe
gas dispersion, are widely used in GSL research. Besides, the
Gaussian sensor model [18] is used as the sensor model due
to its advantage of being able to account for both gas sensor
measurements and environmental uncertainties.
A. Gas Dispersion Model
A gas dispersion model is typically parameterized by the gas
source location r0 = [x0 , y0 ]T , the release rate Q0 , the mean
wind speed V , and the diffusion coefficient ζ. The set of these
parameters is represented as θ.
1) Isotropic Plume Model: In the isotropic plume model, an
analytical model for gas dispersion in an open area, the mean gas
concentration R(rk |θ) at a sensing location rk = [rx,k , ry,k ]T
is expressed as:


−rk − r0 
Q0
exp
R (rk |θ) =
rk − r0 
λ


− (ry,k − y0 ) V
,
(1)
· exp
2ζi

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Bogazici Universitesi. Downloaded on October 03,2025 at 08:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

590

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025


where λ = ζi τ /(1 + V 2 τ /(4ζi )). In the isotropic plume
model, the y direction aligns with the downwind direction, ζi
represents the isotropic effective diffusion coefficient, and τ is
the lifetime of the emitted gas particles.
2) Gaussian Dispersion Model: The Gaussian dispersion
model represents the dispersion of a gas from a point source
in the downwind and crosswind directions. The mean gas concentration R(rk |θ) at a sensing location rk = [rx,k , ry,k ]T is
expressed as:
−ck 2
Q0
exp
,
(2)
2πσV
2σ 2
where the x and y directions align with the downwind and
crosswind directions, respectively. ck is the crosswind distance
between the sensing point and the source origin. The standard
deviation of concentration
in the crosswind direction is defined
√
as σ = ζs dk / 1 + 0.0001dk , where dk is the downwind distance between the sensing point and the source origin and ζs is
the stochastic diffusion coefficient.
R (rk |θ) =

the Gaussian dispersion model, Q0 is estimated along with the
location. In the particle filter, the source parameter state to
be estimated is defined as θ = [x0 , y0 , Q0 ]T ∈ R3 . Based on
Bayes’ rule, the posterior probability density function (PDF)
of the source parameters at time step k, p(θk |z1:k ) can be
represented as:
p (θk |z1:k ) = p (zk |θk ) p (θk |z1:k−1 ) /p (zk |z1:k−1 ) ,

where p(θk |z1:k−1 ) is the prior PDF and p(zk |θk ) is the likelihood from the sensor model in (3). The collected measurement
set up to the time step k is denoted as z1:k = {z1 , z2 , . . ., zk }.
p(zk |z1:k−1 ) is the marginal likelihood, represented as:

p (zk |z1:k−1 ) = p (zk |θk ) p (θk |z1:k−1 ) dθk .
(5)
Since obtaining the analytical solution of (4) is not feasible,
p(θk |z1:k ) is approximated using random samples, referred to
as particles. The i-th particle at the time step k is denoted as θki
and wki is the corresponding weight. The posterior PDF is then
approximated as:

B. Gaussian Sensor Model
To account for the uncertainty in a gas measurement zk , the
gas sensor is modeled as the Gaussian distribution with the
standard deviation σg,k , expressed as:
p (zk |θ) =

(z − R (rk |θ))
1
√ exp − k
,
2
2σg,k
σg,k 2π

(3)

where σg,k = α · R(rk |θ) + σenv . And σenv represents the additional noise by environmental conditions.
III. INFORMATION-THEORETIC SOURCE SEARCH
For robust source location estimation against the gas sensor
noise, probabilistic estimation is required. In this work, the particle filter based on the Bayesian inference is utilized to estimate
source parameters, addressing the non-Gaussian distribution of
the source parameters and the non-linear sensor model. The
performance of GSL using mobile sensors depends significantly
on the strategic selection of sensing points. Such a selection is
crucial not only for enhancing the accuracy of the estimated
source location but also for optimizing the efficiency of search.
In information-theoretic source search [3], [4], the next best
sensing point is determined based on the mutual information.
Here, the mutual information quantifies how much the uncertainty in the current estimation result can be decreased at the
next sensing point. By selecting sensing points that maximize
the mutual information, collecting new measurements, updating
the estimation of the source location, and repeating this process,
the location of the source is estimated efficiently and accurately.
From the following, source parameter estimation and the computation of the mutual information are briefly explained; this
will be the foundation of the proposed dual-mode planner in the
next section.
A. Source Parameter Estimation
The Gaussian dispersion model can determine the source
location from the gas concentration when the release rate Q0 ,
the stochastic diffusion coefficient ζs , and wind speed V are
provided. However, unlike ζs and V , Q0 is difficult to know
beforehand. Therefore, in the source location estimation using

(4)

p (θk |z1:k ) ≈

N




wki δ θk − θki ,

(6)

i=1

where δ(·) indicates the Dirac delta function and N is the total
number of particles. The particle filter iteratively updates wki
based on (4) when a new measurement is obtained. Since the
marginal likelihood in (5) is a constant normalization factor,
the i-th particle weight can be updated under the assumption of
the Markov property and time-invariant source parameter (i.e.,
i
θk−1
= θki ) [4] as:
 i

,
(7)
w̄ki = p zk |θki · wk−1
where w̄ki is the unnormalized weight, p(zk |θki ) is calculated
from (3), and the particles are sampled from p(θk |zk−1 ). Then,
the weights are normalized as:
wki = w̄ki /

N


w̄kj .

(8)

j=1

To make more efficient use of samples representing the probability distribution of source parameters, the resampling method
proposed in [19] is employed.
B. Mutual Information
The mutual information I is defined as the reduction of
Shannon’s entropy Hk , represented as:
I (rk+1 ) = Hk − E Ĥk+1 (ẑk+1 ) ,

(9)

where rk+1 is the sensing point for the next step and ẑk+1 is
predicted sensor measurement at rk+1 . When approximating
the posterior PDF with weights in the particle filter, entropy Hk
can be represented as:
Hk ≈ −

N


wki log(wki ).

(10)

i=1

The second term of (9) is formulated as:

E Ĥk+1 = p (ẑk+1 |θk ) Ĥk+1 (ẑk+1 ) dẑk+1 .

(11)

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Bogazici Universitesi. Downloaded on October 03,2025 at 08:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: GAS SOURCE LOCALIZATION IN UNKNOWN INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS USING DUAL-MODE INFORMATION-THEORETIC SEARCH

591

When approximating Ĥk+1 in the same manner as (10), (11)
can be represented as:

N

i
i
ŵk+1
log(ŵk+1
)dẑk+1 ,
E Ĥk+1 ≈ − p (ẑk+1 |θk )
i=1

(12)
i
where ŵk+1
represents the weights updated according to (7) and
(8) for future measurements ẑk+1 . Note that, since we do not
know what future measurement will be obtained before actually
moving to the corresponding next sensing point, we consider
all possible new measurements with the likelihood p(ẑk+1 |θk )
given the current source estimate in order to calculate the expected entropy. However, (12) is difficult to solve analytically
due to the integral. Therefore, future measurements ẑk+1 are
discretized as:

Fig. 2. Comparison of gas concentration maps. (a) is a concentration map created by regressing 119 CO2 concentration values measured with the SEN15112
gas sensor. (b) is a concentration map generated using the isotropic plume model
and the Gaussian sensor model. (c) is a concentration map generated using the
IGDM and the Gaussian sensor model.

ˆmin
ˆmax
ˆ2
ˆNd
ˆ1
d̂k+1 = dˆmin
k+1 , dk+1 +δd, . . ., dk+1 = dk+1 , dk+1 , . . ., dk+1 . researched in the field of autonomous exploration [20], [21].
(13) We restructure the dual-mode planner to be specialized for the
max
min
ˆ
ˆ
Here, dk+1 and dk+1 represent the maximum and minimum GSL problem. The proposed dual-mode planner consists of a
values of future measurements, respectively, and δd is the dis- local planner and a global planner. The local planner performs
continuous search for the source, while the global planner repocretization interval. Ultimately, (9) is expressed as:
sitions the mobile sensor to the information-rich area when the
N
local planner encounters the dead end. Additionally, to facilitate

I (rk+1 ) ≈ −
wki log(wki )
effective transitions between the global and local planners, we
i=1
propose the dead end detection method specialized for the GSL
problem.
N
N
d


 i 
i
. (14)
+
p dˆjk+1 |θk
ŵk+1
log ŵk+1
j=1
i=1
A. Indoor Gaussian Dispersion Model
Since we use the Gaussian sensor model, the likelihood of the
In this work, the IGDM is proposed to model the gas disdiscretized future measurements p(dˆjk+1 |θk ) can be expressed persion in the indoor environment without airflow. The original
using the cumulative distribution function of the standard normal Gaussian dispersion model (2) differentiates the dispersion of
distribution Φ(·) as:
the gas into downwind and crosswind directions. However, in
 j

 j 
situations without airflow, gas disperses isotropically, so in this
N

Δdˆk+1 + δd
Δdˆk+1
i
letter, the Gaussian dispersion model is restructured into an
p(dˆjk+1 |θk ) =
,
Φ
−
Φ
w
k
i
i
σg,k+1
σg,k+1
isotropic form, represented as:
i=1
(15)


where
R (rk |θ) = Qm · exp −cobs (rk , r0 )2 / 2σm 2 ,
(18)
j
j
i
ˆ
ˆ
Δdk+1 = dk+1 − R(rk+1 |θk ),
(16)
where σm is the standard deviation of concentration and Qm
i
i
σg,k+1 = αR(rk+1 |θk ) + σenv .
(17) represents the release rate in the IGDM. In the IGDM, the
The method for calculating the mutual information based on the standard deviation of concentration is defined as a constant, and
particle filter used in this letter is described in more detail in cobs (rk , r0 ) represents the distance between the sensing point
and the source location in a two-dimensional space, leading
[4], [7].
to isotropic dispersion of the gas. To consider the influence of
obstacles on the gas dispersion, cobs (rk , r0 ) is calculated using
IV. DUAL-MODE INFORMATION-THEORETIC SEARCH WITH
the Dijkstra’s algorithm in the occupancy grid map. While the
INDOOR GAUSSIAN DISPERSION MODEL
occupancy grid map can be incrementally built using online
To develop a gas dispersion model applicable in unknown in- mapping, since the mobile sensor’s position changes at each time
door environments, we assume the indoor setting with no airflow step, cobs needs to be recalculated every time step. However, by
which is reasonable since most indoor environments are shielded modifying the termination condition of the Dijkstra’s algorithm
from external winds by walls. By eliminating the influence of to check all grids in the map, the distance between all source
airflow on indoor gas dispersion, the need for a complete map for location hypotheses (i.e., particle locations in the particle filter)
modeling gas dispersion disappears. We modify the widely-used and the current mobile sensor can be computed with a single
Gaussian dispersion model considering the effect of obstacles so execution of the Dijkstra’s algorithm. To verify if the IGDM can
that it can be effectively used in indoor environments with online effectively model real indoor gas dispersion, gas concentration
mapping. Besides, the complexity of indoor environments can data measured in an indoor space with an actual CO2 gas was
lead to local optima during the source search process, referred compared with concentration maps reconstructed through the
to as a dead end in this work. To address this dead end problem, IGDM as well as the isotropic plume model. This comparison
we introduce a dual-mode planner, which has been actively is presented in Fig. 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Bogazici Universitesi. Downloaded on October 03,2025 at 08:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

592

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

represented as:
BI ∗ = max BI (Vb ) .
Vb ∈V

(20)

The local planner is considered to have reached the dead end
when this optimal branch information value falls below the dead
end threshold BI thresh . Determining BI thresh in advance is
challenging as it is not appropriate to classify every dead end
in the indoor environment with a constant BI thresh . Therefore,
BI thresh is designed to be updated at every time step, represented as:
thresh
= · BIkthresh + (1 − ) BI ∗ , 0 < < 1,
BIk+1

Fig. 3.

Process of RH RRT-Infotaxis.

B. Dual-Mode Planner
1) Local Planner: The local planner is designed to incorporate the concept of the receding-horizon based RRTInfotaxis [7]. In this approach, the RRT tree is confined to
Ntn vertices within a radius Rrange from the current mobile
sensor location, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a). Vertices are sampled
from the occupancy grid map to ensure they are free from
collisions. Then, by the pruning process shown in Fig. 3(b),
the tree only keeps the branches comprised of m vertices. These
pruned branches, V = [V1 , V2 , . . ., VNb ], serve as potential action candidates. Each branch is formulated by a vertex set
Vb = [vb,1 , vb,2 , . . .vb,m ]. Subsequently, as depicted in Fig. 3(c),
the information of each branch is evaluated and the branch
with the highest information is chosen. Finally, as illustrated
in Fig. 3(d), the mobile sensor navigates to the first vertex of the
selected branch. At the first vertex, a new gas concentration zk+1
and LiDAR scans are measured, followed by the update of the
particle filter and the construction of occupancy grid map. After
the update with the obtained measurement, dead end detection
is performed. If a dead-end is detected, the dual-mode planner
switches to the global planner; otherwise, the process of the
local planner is executed again. The branch information BI is
designed to accumulate the mutual information of vertices in the
branch, expressed as:
BI (Vb ) =

m


γ (i−1) I (vb,i ) ,

(19)

i=1

where γ is a discount factor designed to assign higher weights
to information from the closer future. I(vb,i ) denotes the mutual
information at vertex vb,i , calculated by (14).
2) Dead End Detection: When the mobile sensor encounters
a dead end, the dual-mode planner switches from the local
planner to the global planner. The determination of the dead
end is based on the optimal branch information value among the
local planner branches. The optimal branch information BI ∗ is

(21)

where is a positive weight. Equation (21) functions similarly
to a low-pass filter and thus BIkthresh trails the optimal branch
information with a delay. When the optimal branch information
decreases sharply (i.e., no useful information can be obtained),
the optimal branch information becomes smaller than BIkthresh ,
at which point the dual-mode planner transitions to the global
planner.
3) Global Planner: The global planner is based on the frontier exploration [16] to guide the mobile sensor towards areas
rich in information. A frontier is a boundary between known and
unknown areas, representing regions rich in new information.
Path planning in the global planner is based on the probabilistic
road map (PRM) [22] method to efficiently find the path to
the frontier. For applying PRM to the frontier exploration, we
modified PRM graph expansion so that the global graph can
effectively represent frontiers. The expansion process of the
global graph is as follows. Firstly, frontiers are detected using
the breadth-first search in the occupancy grid map [23]. These
detected frontiers are then clustered based on their continuity,
with each cluster represented by a frontier centroid, which is the
center point of each cluster. Subsequently, to expand the graph,
new vertices are sampled and connected to adjacent vertices
with edges, similar to the typical PRM. The key difference,
however, is that every time a new vertex is added, those within
a specified radius from the frontier centroid are designated as
the frontier vertex vf,i . In the process of repeating new vertex
sampling, if the vertex closer to the frontier centroid is added
to the graph, the frontier vertex is updated to this new vertex.
The expansion of the global graph continues until all frontier
centroids are designated as frontier vertices. The sample of this
global graph is represented in Fig. 4.
When the global planner is activated by dead end detection,
the utility of the frontier vertices is evaluated by a global utility
function Ug , defined as:
Ug (vf,i ) = I (vf,i ) · exp (−λp · cost (rk , vf,i ))
· exp (−λs · D (vf,i , r̂0 )),

(22)

where cost(rk , vf,i ) is the path length from the current position
to the frontier vertex found by Dijkstra’s algorithm in the global
graph and D(vf,i , r̂0 ) is the Euclidean distance between the
frontier node and the currently estimated gas source location r̂0 .
Here, r̂0 refers to the location component of θ̂ = [r̂0 , Q̂0 ] where

i i
the currently estimated gas source parameter θ̂ = N
i=1 wk θk
represents the weighted sum of the particles in the particle filter.
λp and λs are the weights for cost(rk , vf,i ) and D(vf,i , r̂0 ),
respectively. The global utility function is designed to maximize
the mutual information while minimizing the total exploration
path. Once the frontier vertex with the highest global utility is

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Bogazici Universitesi. Downloaded on October 03,2025 at 08:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: GAS SOURCE LOCALIZATION IN UNKNOWN INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS USING DUAL-MODE INFORMATION-THEORETIC SEARCH

Fig. 4.

Fig. 5.

593

Sample of the global graph.

Fig. 6.

Illustrative results of source search in the environment B.

Fig. 7.

Illustrative results of source search in the environment C.

Illustrative results of source search in the environment A.

selected, the mobile sensor moves along the global path generated by the Dijkstra’s algorithm in the global graph. During the
execution of the global path, new gas concentrations and LiDAR
scans are measured at each waypoint, followed by updates to the
particle filter and the occupancy grid map. Here, waypoints are
the vertices of the global graph that exist on the global path.
If, at the next waypoint to be visited, the mutual information is
evaluated to be more than 1.5 times of BIkthresh , the dual-mode
planner reverts back to the local planner to continue the source
search.
V. EXPERIMENTAL VALIDATION
A. Autonomous Source Search Simulation in GADEN
The proposed method is validated in environments A, B
and C, as shown in Figs. 5, 6, and 7, through the GADEN
simulator [17], where the dispersion of ethanol gas is simulated.
To utilize a more realistic map with the IGDM, the mobile
sensor is configured as Clearpath robotics Jackal equipped with
VLP-16 LiDAR in the GAZEBO environment. The occupancy
grid map is constructed in real-time using the robot’s true
odometry and LiDAR scan information. Gas concentration measurements are taken through a photoionization detector sensor
implemented in GADEN. Path following for both local and
global path is facilitated through the ROS Navigation stack
package.
The simulation results in the environments A, B and C are
presented in Tables II, III, and IV, respectively. Each method
in the tables was performed 20 times. The performance is

TABLE I
PARAMETERS SUMMARY

quantified in terms of success rate (SR), search time (ST), travel
distance (TD), and gas source location estimation error. The SR
is defined as the proportion of success cases out of total trials.
Success cases are defined as when the source location estimation
error is within 2.0m and ST is within 200 steps. The ST is defined
as the number of gas concentration measurements taken until the
source search is finished. TD refers to the total distance traveled
by the robot during the source search. ST, TD, and error represent
the mean of 20 trials, and the numbers in parentheses indicate
the standard deviation. The parameters used in the environments
A, B, and C are presented in Table I.
In the environment A, the results of source search using the
local planner, the global planner, frontier exploration, and the
proposed dual-mode planner are compared. The results from
the environment A are presented in Table II where RRT 4-step,
RRT 6-step, and RRT 8-step refer to the use of only the local
planner with the receding horizon steps set to 4, 6, and 8,
respectively. Frontier exploration is conducted by moving to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Bogazici Universitesi. Downloaded on October 03,2025 at 08:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

594

IEEE ROBOTICS AND AUTOMATION LETTERS, VOL. 10, NO. 1, JANUARY 2025

TABLE II
RESULTS IN THE ENVIRONMENT A

TABLE III
RESULTS OF THE DUAL-MODE PLANNER IN THE ENVIRONMENT B

TABLE IV
RESULTS OF THE DUAL-MODE PLANNER IN THE ENVIRONMENT C

nearest frontier in the global graph. The global planner performs
source search by moving to frontiers on the global graph similar
to frontier exploration, but it selects the frontiers based on a
global utility function in (22). The dual-mode planner utilizes a
combination of the local planner with a receding horizon step
of 4 and the global planner. To demonstrate the effectiveness
of the proposed IGDM, the dual-mode planner-ISO using the
isotropic plume model in (1) is simulated. On the other hand, all
other methods use the IGDM. Note that the original Gaussian
dispersion model in (2) cannot be used in no-wind conditions.
The source declaration is made when the standard deviation of
the source location component in the particle filter falls below
a specific threshold σt , and the algorithm terminates along with
it. Besides, in both the global planner and frontier exploration,
even if the particle filter has not converged yet, the algorithm is
terminated along with source declaration when the exploration
of the environment is completed (i.e., no further frontiers are
found). In Table II, the travel time is time taken to complete
source search including the computation time.
In the environment A, both the RRT 4-step and RRT 6-step
show low success rates with the RRT 4-step showing 75%
success rate and the RRT 6-step showing 80% success rate. All
their failure cases resulting from inability to exit dead ends,
leading to the source search not being completed within 200
steps. Both frontier exploration and the global planner also
show low success rates of 80% and 75%, respectively, with all
failure cases occurring due to source location estimation errors
exceeding 2.0 meters. The dual-mode planner-ISO also showed
a significantly low success rate of 35%, with all failure cases
occurring due to source location estimation errors exceeding 2.0
meters; this results from the mismatch between the dispersion
model and reality as shown in Fig. 2. In contrast, the RRT
8-step and the dual-mode planner exhibited high success rates
of 95% and 100%, respectively, outperforming other methods.
The dual-mode planner shows a longer travel distance compared to the RRT 8-step, but the average travel time is nearly
3 minutes shorter due to much lower computation time per
step.

Fig. 8.

Setup for the real-world experiments.

In the environment B, to demonstrate the robustness of the proposed dual-mode planner, simulations are conducted 20 times
for gas sources at four different positions, as shown in Fig. 6.
The results can be seen in Table III, showing a 100% SR for all
four positions.
Even though assuming an environment without the influx of
strong airflow from outside might be valid, weak airflows can
still exist indoors. To verify the applicability of the proposed
method to the real world, simulations are conducted in the
environment C, both without airflow and with weak airflow, as
depicted in Fig. 7. The weak airflow environment is simulated
for the steady-state flow with an inlet velocity of 0.1m/s. In weak
airflow environments, σenv was set to 4.0ppm to enable robust
source location estimation despite discrepancies between the
model and actual dispersion. As seen in Table IV, although the
proposed method displays a relatively lower success rate and
longer search time in environments with weak airflow, it still
maintains reasonable performance.
B. Real-World Experiments
In real-world experiments conducted in the environment
shown in Fig. 8(b), a gas tank with its valve opened is used
to release CO2 gas. The AgileX Limo UGV is utilized as the
mobile sensor for the experiments. An Intel NUC with Intel
i7-1165G7 CPU is used for the computation of the proposed
method, along with a Livox-Mid360 LiDAR for environmental
perception. For mobile sensor localization, one of LiDARinertial odometry algorithms, FAST-LIO2 [24], is used. The
SEN15112 is employed as the gas sensor. The experiments are
carried out 10 times, with the source search starting 3 minutes
after the initiation of the CO2 leak to allow the CO2 gas to
sufficiently disperse throughout the experimental space. In the
algorithms, the gas measurement is obtained 5 seconds after the

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Bogazici Universitesi. Downloaded on October 03,2025 at 08:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: GAS SOURCE LOCALIZATION IN UNKNOWN INDOOR ENVIRONMENTS USING DUAL-MODE INFORMATION-THEORETIC SEARCH

TABLE V
RESULTS OF REAL-WORLD EXPERIMENTS

mobile sensor reaches the sensing point, taking into account
the response and recovery time of the gas sensor. After each
experiment, the CO2 gas was removed using the ventilation
system before proceeding to the next experiment.
The sample result of the source search process is shown in
Fig. 1. As shown in Fig. 1(a), the dual-mode planner first generates a search path based on local RRT. As shown in Fig. 1(b),
when encountering dead ends that cannot be overcome by the
local planner, it switches to the global planner to move the mobile
sensor from the dead end to an area rich in map information,
thereby continuing source search. The real-world experimental
results for the RRT 4-step, the global planner and the dual-mode
planner are presented in Table V. Success cases are defined as
when the source location estimation error is within 2.0m and ST
is within 120 steps. The other parameters for the algorithms used
in the experiment are the same as those shown in Table I, except
for σenv of 3,000ppm and σt of 0.65m. As seen in the results of
Table V, the proposed method shows a success rate of 90% with
the smaller estimation error, significantly outperforming other
methods. A movie clip showing simulations and experiments
can be found at https://youtu.be/nJfTkX9naTU.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this study, we proposed the IGDM that, despite its simplicity, effectively models indoor gas dispersion. Additionally, we
introduced the dual-mode planner that integrates the local planner focused on maximizing information acquisition, with the
global planner that guides the mobile sensor to information-rich
areas, particularly useful in dead end scenarios. The effectiveness of this method is validated through simulations using the
GADEN simulator and real-world experiments, suggesting its
applicability in actual indoor GSL tasks.
However, a major limitation of our research lies in its applicability to indoor environments with strong airflows, presenting
a significant challenge in the field of GSL. Finding a source
in environments with strong airflows without prior information about the environment remains an unsolved problem. In
future research, we aim to develop new approaches and models
that consider these environments. Furthermore, as the size and
complexity of indoor environments increase, the limitations of
a single mobile sensor become evident. In such environments,
expanding to a multi-agent system is crucial for efficient source
search. Therefore, we are also aiming to extend our approach to
a multi-agent system. Besides, the use of visual sensors along
with gas sensors would be helpful to identify the possible source
location. This effort is crucial in broadening the scope of GSL
technology and enhancing the ability to detect and respond to
gas leaks in indoor environments.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Hutchinson, H. Oh, and W.-H. Chen, “A review of source term estimation methods for atmospheric dispersion events using static or mobile
sensors,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 91, pp. 83–100, 2017.

595

[2] X. Chen and J. Huang, “Odor source localization algorithms on mobile
robots: A review and future outlook,” Robot. Auton. Syst., vol. 112,
pp. 123–136, 2019.
[3] M. Vergassola, E. Villermaux, and B. I. Shraiman, “‘Infotaxis’ as a strategy
for searching without gradients,” Nature, vol. 445, no. 7126, pp. 406–409,
2007.
[4] B. Ristic, A. Skvortsov, and A. Gunatilaka, “A study of cognitive strategies
for an autonomous search,” Inf. Fusion, vol. 28, pp. 1–9, 2016.
[5] M. Hutchinson, H. Oh, and W.-H. Chen, “Entrotaxis as a strategy for
autonomous search and source reconstruction in turbulent conditions,”
Inf. Fusion, vol. 42, pp. 179–189, 2018.
[6] M. Hutchinson, C. Liu, and W.-H. Chen, “Source term estimation of a
hazardous airborne release using an unmanned aerial vehicle,” J. Field
Robot, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 797–817, 2019.
[7] S. An, M. Park, and H. Oh, “Receding-horizon RRT-Infotaxis for autonomous source search in urban environments,” Aerosp. Sci. Technol.,
vol. 120, 2022, Art. no. 107276.
[8] M. Park, S. An, J. Seo, and H. Oh, “Autonomous source search for UAVs
using gaussian mixture model-based infotaxis: Algorithm and flight experiments,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 4238–4254,
Dec. 2021.
[9] Y. A. Prabowo, R. Ranasinghe, G. Dissanayake, B. Riyanto, and B.
Yuliarto, “A Bayesian approach for gas source localization in large indoor environments,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2020,
pp. 4432–4437.
[10] Y. A. Prabowo, B. R. Trilaksono, E. M. Hidayat, and B. Yuliarto, “Integration of Bayesian inference and anemotaxis for robotics gas source
localization in a large cluttered outdoor environment,” IEEE Access,
vol. 11, pp. 22705–22713, 2023.
[11] P. Ojeda, J. Monroy, and J. Gonzalez-Jimenez, “Robotic gas source localization with probabilistic mapping and online dispersion simulation,”
IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 40, pp. 3551–3564, 2024.
[12] C. Sánchez-Garrido, J. G. Monroy, and J. G. Jiménez, “Probabilistic
estimation of the gas source location in indoor environments by combining
gas and wind observations,” in Proc. Appl. Intell. Syst., 2018, pp. 110–121.
[13] J. G. Monroy, M. Jaimez, and J. Gonzalez-Jimenez, “Online estimation
of 2D wind maps for olfactory robots,” in Proc. ISOCS/IEEE Int. Symp.
Olfaction Electron. Nose, 2017, pp. 1–3.
[14] W. Jin, F. Rahbar, C. Ercolani, and A. Martinoli, “Towards efficient gas
leak detection in built environments: Data-driven plume modeling for
gas sensing robots,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Automat., 2023,
pp. 7749–7755.
[15] C. Rhodes, C. Liu, P. Westoby, and W.-H. Chen, “Autonomous search of
an airborne release in urban environments using informed tree planning,”
Auton. Robots, vol. 47, no. 1, pp. 1–18, 2023.
[16] B. Yamauchi, “A frontier-based approach for autonomous exploration,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Comput. Intell. Robot. Automat., 1997, pp. 146–151.
[17] J. Monroy, V. Hernandez-Bennetts, H. Fan, A. Lilienthal, and J. GonzalezJimenez, “GADEN: A 3D gas dispersion simulator for mobile robot olfaction in realistic environments,” Sensors, vol. 17, no. 7, 2017, Art. no. 1479.
[18] M. Hutchinson, C. Liu, and W.-H. Chen, “Information-based search for
an atmospheric release using a mobile robot: Algorithm and experiments,” IEEE Trans. Control Syst. Technol., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 2388–2402,
Nov. 2019.
[19] B. Ristic, S. Arulampalam, and N. Gordon, Beyond the Kalman Filter:
Particle Filters for Tracking Applications. Norwood, MA, USA: Artech
House, 2003.
[20] T. Dang, F. Mascarich, S. Khattak, C. Papachristos, and K. Alexis,
“Graph-based path planning for autonomous robotic exploration in subterranean environments,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2019,
pp. 3105–3112.
[21] H. Zhu, C. Cao, Y. Xia, S. Scherer, J. Zhang, and W. Wang, “DSVP: Dualstage viewpoint planner for rapid exploration by dynamic expansion,” in
Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Robots Syst., 2021, pp. 7623–7630.
[22] L. E. Kavraki, P. Svestka, J.-C. Latombe, and M. H. Overmars, “Probabilistic roadmaps for path planning in high-dimensional configuration spaces,”
IEEE Trans. Robot. Automat., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 566–580, Aug. 1996.
[23] M. Keidar and G. A. Kaminka, “Robot exploration with fast frontier
detection: Theory and experiments,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Auton. Agents
Multiagent Syst., 2012, pp. 113–120.
[24] W. Xu, Y. Cai, D. He, J. Lin, and F. Zhang, “FAST-LIO2: Fast direct LiDAR-inertial odometry,” IEEE Trans. Robot., vol. 38, no. 4,
pp. 2053–2073, Aug. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: ULAKBIM UASL - Bogazici Universitesi. Downloaded on October 03,2025 at 08:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

